In this blog, we will look at how to create a simple upgradeable smart contract using the delegate call property of solidity. For this we will follow the simple proxy pattern where one contract will hold the logic for function implementation and another will store the state.

# Simple Proxy Pattern

There are three types of proxies that can be used to create an upgradeable smart contract. These are:

1. Simple Proxy Pattern
2. Transparent Proxy Pattern
3. Universal Proxy Pattern

We will follow the simple proxy pattern for this blog. The other two patterns will be covered in future blogs.

The simple proxy pattern is a design pattern that allows for the separation of the storage and logic of a smart contract. This is done by having a proxy contract that delegates all calls to an implementation contract. The proxy contract will store the state of the contract and the implementation contract will store the logic. This allows for the implementation contract to be upgraded without losing the state of the contract.

We will use the following contracts to demonstrate the simple proxy pattern.

```js
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.19;

contract Logic1 {
    uint256 public value;

    function setValue(uint256 _newValue) external {
        value = _newValue;
    }
}

contract State {
    uint256 public value;
    address public logicContract;

    constructor(address _receiver) {
        logicContract = _receiver;
    }

    function updateLogicContract(address _logic) external {
        logicContract = _logic;
    }

    function updateValue(uint256 _newValue) external {
        (bool success, ) = logicContract.delegatecall(
            abi.encodeWithSignature("setValue(uint256)", _newValue)
        );
        require(success, "Delegate call failed");
    }
}
```

The `Logic1` contract is the implementation contract. It contains the logic for the `setValue` function. The `State` contract is the proxy contract. It stores the state of the contract and delegates all calls to the implementation contract. Users will interact with the proxy contract which will remain unchanged even if the implementation contract is upgraded.

Remember to follow the same order of variables in the implementation contract and the proxy contract. This is because the proxy contract will store the state of the implementation contract and if the order of variables is different then there will be storage collisions. To understand storage collisions, you need to understand how storage works in solidity. You can read more about it [here](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.4/internals/layout_in_storage.html).

# Delegate Call

The `delegatecall` function is a low level function that allows you to call another contract and execute its code in the context of the calling contract. This means that the called contract will have access to the storage of the calling contract and logic of the called contract will be executed in the context of the calling contract. This is different from the `call` function which executes the logic of the called contract in the context of the called contract.

In the `updateValue` function of the `State` contract, we are using the `delegatecall` function to call the `setValue` function of the `Logic1` contract. This will execute the logic of the `setValue` function in the context of the `State` contract. This means that the `Logic1` contract will have access to the storage of the `State` contract. After the call the state of the `State` contract will be updated and the state of the `Logic1` contract will remain unchanged.

You can try this in remix by deploying the `State` contract and then calling the `updateValue` function with a value. You will see that the value of the `State` contract will be updated and the value of the `Logic1` contract will remain unchanged.

# Upgrading the Implementation Contract

Now that we have a proxy contract and an implementation contract, we can upgrade the implementation contract without losing the state of the proxy contract.

To do this we will create a new implementation contract and deploy it. Remember to follow the same order of variables and same function signatures in the new implementation contract. This is because the proxy contract is still unchanged.

Let try to update the `setValue` function in the `Logic1` contract. We will change the `setValue` function to the following:

```js
contract Logic2 {
    uint256 value;

    function setValue(uint256 _newValue) external {
        value += _newValue;
    }
}
```

Deploy the `Logic2` contract and copy its address. Now call the `updateLogicContract` function of the `State` contract with the address of the `Logic2` contract. This will update the implementation contract of the `State` contract to the `Logic2` contract. Now call the `updateValue` function of the `State` contract with a value. You will see that now the logic of the `Logic2` contract is executed in the context of the `State` contract and the value of the `State` contract is updated.

The codes are available on [github repo](https://github.com/somesh-banerjee/Upgradeable-Contracts)
